[ChatStateLayer] Overview markdown document (#3169)
GetStream/stream-chat-swift: docusaurus/docs/iOS/client/state-layer/state-layer-overview.md

---

> title: Structured Concurrency State Layer

Author: I was also considering `Async Await State Layer`, but not sure which one is better.

Author: I think it makes sense if it is just called "Structured Concurrency"

Reviewer: why not just "State layer"?

---

## Introduction

> The `StreamChat` framework has represented the Stream API with controllers which use completion handlers and delegates for communicating about the changes. In addition to controllers, we provide an alternative way of interacting with the Stream API. The alternative state layer embraces structured concurrency and provides an interface using async functions. While controllers used delegates, the state layer provides a way of observing data changes through `@Published` properties and state objects conforming to `ObservableObject` protocol. One of the important improvements of the new state layer is predictability of the current data state. One of the short comings of controllers is that while it provides completion handlers, it did not ensure that the data is up to date when the completion handler is called. Chat state layer, on the other hand, ensures that when an async method call returns, the state is up to date and the required API request has finished. Let's consider an example below where we ask to load messages. When the `loadMessages(with:)` returns, we are guaranteed that the observable state object has all the loaded messages available.

Reviewer: Also good if we link the controllers here.

```

## Types Representing the State

We provide different types of objects for accessing and manipulating data the Stream API provides. These types follow an architecture where high level types provide methods for interacting with the Stream API and an state counterpart which provides access to currently loaded data. The state object is observable and is backed by the local persistent store.

* ChannelList
  * ChannelListState
* Chat
  * ChatState
  * MessageState
* ConnectedUser
  * ConnectedUserState
* MemberList
  * MemberListState
* MessageSearch
  * MessageSearchState
* UserList
  * UserListState
* UserSearch
  * UserSearchState

These types are created through factory methods in `ChatClient`. Factory methods provide a way to create instances of `ChannelList`, `Chat`, `ConnectedUser`, `MemberList`, `MessageSearch`, `UserList`,  and `UserSearch`. This instance provides access to the locally available state. The observable state is accessed through `state` property and it returns the respective state object. `ChannelList`, `Chat`, `MemberList`, and `UserList` provide a `get()` method for fetching the default set of data from the Stream API.

### ChannelList

> `ChannelList` and its `ChannelListState` enable querying a list of channels from the Stream API and provides an interface for loading channels in a paginated manner.

Reviewer: provide* an interface

    }
```

### Chat

`Chat` and its `ChatState` represent the state of a channel. In addition, `Chat` provides a method for retrieving an observable `MessageState` type which represents a single message and its observable state like reactions and replies.

```swift
let channelId = ChannelId(type: .messaging, id: "general")
let chat = chatClient.makeChat(for: channelId)
// local state of the channel (state from previous sessions)
var messages = chat.state.messages
var members = chat.state.members
// fetch the latest state from the Stream API and subscribe to server-side events
try await chat.get(watch: true)
// access all the fetched messages and members
messages = chat.state.messages
members = chat.state.members
// fetch more messages
try await chat.loadOlderMessages()
// access all the fetched messages
messages = chat.state.messages
```

If we would like to observe a single message's state we can use the `MessageState` observable object.

```swift
let messageState = try await chat.messageState(for: messageId)
try await chat.loadMoreReactions(for: messageId)
// access all the fetched reactions
let reactions = messageState.reactions 
```

### ConnectedUser

> `ConnectedUser` and its `ConnectedUserState` represent the currently logged in user. We can set up push notifications through it and set states, like muting an user, which affects all the channels. Another common use-case is marking all the channels as read.

Reviewer: muting a user

---
title: Structured Concurrency State Layer
---

## Introduction

> The `StreamChat` framework represents the Stream API with controllers which use completion handlers and delegates for communicating about state changes. In addition to controllers, we provide an alternative way of interacting with the Stream API. The alternative state layer embraces structured concurrency and provides an interface of using async functions.

Reviewer: Probably good to mention that the new objects are use-case / interactor based, where you can perform different operations on them. Good opportunity to say that it blends well with our video SDK, which can be linked as well. Structured concurrency is more of a technical term.

Author: Makes sense, I'll reword this part.

> While controllers use delegates, the state layer provides a way of observing data changes through `@Published` properties. Observable properties are part of state objects which conform to the `ObservableObject` protocol.

Reviewer: another extra space between paragraphs would look better.

> One of the important improvements of the new state layer is predictability of the current data state. One of the short comings of controllers is that while it provides completion handlers, it did not ensure that the data is up to date when the completion handler is called. The new state layer, on the other hand, ensures that when an async method call returns, the state is up to date and the required API request has finished.

Reviewer: it does not ensure

Let's consider an example below where we ask to load messages. When the `loadMessages(with:)` returns, we are guaranteed that the observable state object has all the loaded messages available.

> 

Reviewer: what can we say about thread safety?

Author: Added a couple of sentences

---
title: State Layer
---

## Introduction

The `StreamChat` framework represents the Stream API with [controllers](../controllers/controllers-overview.md) which use completion handlers and delegates for communicating about state changes. In addition to controllers, we provide an additional way of interacting with the Stream API. It follows an architecture where we have stateless objects interacting with the Stream API through async functions. These objects are accompanied with state objects what hold the current state. This architecture follows similar rules as our [Video SDK for iOS](https://getstream.io/video/sdk/ios/).

> 

Author: Could you please check again if it looks OK. I formatted it after other markdown documents.

---
title: State Layer
---

## Introduction

The `StreamChat` framework represents the Stream API with [controllers](../controllers/controllers-overview.md) which use completion handlers and delegates for communicating about state changes. In addition to controllers, we provide an additional way of interacting with the Stream API. It follows an architecture where we have objects interacting with the Stream API through async functions. These objects are accompanied with state objects that hold the current state. This architecture follows similar patterns as our [Video SDK for iOS](https://getstream.io/video/sdk/ios/).

> While controllers use delegates, the state layer provides a way of observing data changes through `@Published` properties. Observable properties are part of state objects which conform to the `ObservableObject` protocol.

Reviewer 2: Some where here, or with a `::: note` block we should say this is a new approach and only available after 4.XX.0+

* UserSearch
  * UserSearchState

These objects are created through factory methods in `ChatClient`. Factory methods create instances of `ChannelList`, `Chat`, `ConnectedUser`, `MemberList`, `MessageSearch`, `ReactionList`, `UserList`,  and `UserSearch`. The observable state is accessed through `state` properties what return the respective state object. `ChannelList`, `Chat`, `MemberList`, `ReactionList`, and `UserList` have a `get()` method for fetching the default set of data from the Stream API.

### ChannelList

`ChannelList` and its `ChannelListState` enable querying a list of channels from the Stream API and provide an interface for loading channels in a paginated manner.

```swift
let query = ChannelListQuery(
    filter: .and([
        .equal(.type, to: .messaging), 
        .containMembers(userIds: ["thierry"])
    ]),
    sort: [Sorting(key: .lastMessageAt, isAscending: false)],
    pageSize: 10
)
let channelList = chatClient.makeChannelList(with: query)
// local state of the channel list (state from previous sessions)
var channels = channelList.state.channels
// fetch the first page of channels from the Stream API
try await channelList.get()
// fetch more channels

> try await channelList.loadMoreChannels()

Reviewer 2: Random thought: Now that I look into these 2 together, probably `getMoreChannels()` makes more sense 😅 Since get and load are pretty much the same thing, the naming could be more consistent across the different APIs 🤔

// access all the fetched channels
channels = channelList.state.channels
```

Since `ChannelListState` is observable, we can observe and react to channel list changes.

```swift
let cancellable = channelList.state
    .$channels
    .sink { channels in
        // do something with channels
    }
```

### Chat

> `Chat` and its `ChatState` represent the state of a channel. In addition, `Chat` has a method for retrieving an observable `MessageState` type which represents a single message and its observable state like reactions and replies.

Reviewer 2: Does it make sense to mention reactions, with the new ReactionListState? 🤔

```swift
let channelId = ChannelId(type: .messaging, id: "general")
let chat = chatClient.makeChat(for: channelId)
// local state of the channel (state from previous sessions)
var messages = chat.state.messages
var members = chat.state.members

> // fetch the latest state from the Stream API and subscribe to server-side events

Reviewer 2: Maybe it is more clear like so, without getting into implementation details? 🤔 
```suggestion
// fetch the latest state from the Stream API and subscribe to data changes.
```
or 
`// fetch the latest state from the Stream API and subscribe to new web-socket events`
if we want the implementation details, but a bit more accurate

try await chat.get(watch: true)
// access all the fetched messages and members
messages = chat.state.messages
members = chat.state.members
// fetch more messages
try await chat.loadOlderMessages()
// access all the fetched messages
messages = chat.state.messages
```

:::tip Call get with watch true once per app lifetime

The get method fetches the latest state from the Stream API and if we set watch to true, server-side events will keep your local state up to state.

:::

If we would like to observe a single message's state we can use the `MessageState` observable object.

```swift
let messageState = try await chat.messageState(for: messageId)
try await chat.loadMoreReactions(for: messageId)
// access all the fetched reactions

> let reactions = messageState.reactions 

Reviewer 2: Better to use the replies example, since Reactions will move to `ReactionList`

```

### ConnectedUser

`ConnectedUser` and its `ConnectedUserState` represent the currently logged in user. We can set up push notifications and set states, like muting a user in every channel. Another common use-case is marking all the channels as read.

```swift
var connectedUser = try await chatClient.connectUser(
    userInfo: UserInfo(id: "<# Your User ID Here #>"),
    token: "<# Your User Token Here#>"
)
// or while being logged in
connectedUser = try chatClient.makeConnectedUser()
// register for push notifications
try await connectedUser.addDevice(
    .apn(
        token: apnTokenData, 
        providerName: "<# Your Stream's Push Configuration Name>"
    )
)
try await connectedUser.markAllChannelsRead()
```

### MemberList

> `MemberList` and `MemberListState` represent channel members for the specified query. The query supports a wide variety of filters and sorting options. While `MemberList` provides advanced querying capabilities, it is not required if we would like to load all the channel members. For that purpose, `Chat` has built-in paginated loading methods for all the channel members.

Reviewer 2: I guess this is the same thing we have on Reactions 🤔 This requires some discussion, but could this be a bit confusing? Having 2 ways to load members, and 2 ways of loading reactions. Can't we have the simple and the more customizable version in 1 API only. For example, if you don't provide a filter or query, it just loads all reaction/members.
